#+BEGIN_COMMENT
.. title: Moel Famau
.. slug: 2010-02-11-moel-famau
.. date: 2010-02-11 17:45:49 UTC
.. tags: mountaineering, walks
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
#+END_COMMENT
I had passed the Clwydian range hundreds of times on the way to
Snowdonia, but I had never climbed any of its hills. Amongst other
things the hills are famous for the range of iron Age hill forts, with
six forts along the crest of the ridge. The crest of the ridge is
heather moorland and Offa's Dyke path follows almost the entire ridge.


The weather forecast predicted a cold, clear day, so I decided to
Cilcain for a walk up Moel Arthur and then along the ridge to Moel
Famau, the highest top.

I had found an interesting route that traversed the ridge from Moel
Arhtur to Moel Famau on the [[http://www.walkingbritain.co.uk/walks/walks/walk_a/2509/][Walking Britain]] website. I drove to the
start of the route in Cilcain, which is just off the main Mold to
Denbigh road. I stopped briefly in the car park opposite the church
which has a notice stating "The gate may be locked at any time‚Äù. The
Walking Britain site suggests that you drive down the lane next to the
church over a stream and park near to the tree by the large grey steel
framed building, so that's what I did. There was quite a bit of space
and only one other car there.

I parked up and started heating some water for a flask using my new
Primus Gravity II stove. I was using a Coleman's gas cylinder, which
is a propane/butane mix, so even though the temperature wasn't much
above freezing the water was soon boiling.

From the car I walked back into Cilcain and then took the path
opposite the church running North West on the right hand side of the
car park. I followed the path over a few stiles and arrived at a small
lane. On the way I passed several clumps of snowdrops, a nice sign
that Spring can't be too far away. Careful study of the map showed
that I need to turn left, walk a few yards and then follow a small
lane off to the right down a hill.

I followed the lane until reached a T junction, where I climbed over
the stile directly in front of me. The path continued in more or less
a straight line over several fields. When I reached a small wood on
the left, I went diagonally to the right hand corner of the
field. There I had a short chat with two people hanging a gate. I
wasn't sure about the way ahead, but there was a yellow waymark
pointing along the line of the fence to the left. I continued along
the line of the fence, through some very boggy ground and crossed the
stream via some convenient stones without getting my feet wet. I
turned left, expecting to find a gate after a short distance. However,
there was a new looking fence made from pig netting and barbed, with
no apparent way through. I walked backwards and forwards along the
fence a couple of times, but couldn't find an easy way over or
through. Luckily, I found an empty feed bucket and by standing on top
of this I was able to get over the fence.

I crossed the field and found the stile in the hedge by the road at
grid ref. SJ162670.  I climbed over the stile and went in a generally
leftwards direction to cross over a stream. Once over the stream, I
followed the path straight up the hill into the corner of the wood. I
continued along the path straight ahead for a short distance and then
took the forestry track to the left, which led uphill. This lead to a
gate at grid ref. SJ156677, with a wooden horse jump to its left. I
climbed over the jump and turned left along the wide path, which
skirted the woods to my left. The views from the path were extensive,
as I was on the crest of a ridge. Eventually, the path started to drop
down towards the car park at grid ref. 147657. I should have turned
right here and carried on up the eastern slope of Moel Arthur to the
summit, but I carried on along the path. About two thirds of the way
down to the car park I realized my mistake, so I cut directly back up
the side of Moel Arthur to the summit.

After taking a few photos I made my way back down the slope to the car
park, which was quite busy. I crossed the road and started to make my
way directly up the hill opposite. The path goes up through a small
gully, which was still full of snow. I stopped just below the snow and
had a chat with a man who was in the process of putting on a pair of
small crampons. I reached the snow, which turned out to be iron hard
neve. Luckily there was a ladder of steps and the slope was short.

Once I reached the ridge there were views of Snowdon, Cadair Idris,
the North Wales coast. I could see snow on the peaks on Snowdonia, but
Cader seemed to be snow free. I followed the path along the crest of
the ridge towards Moel Famau. I wished that I had brought my
binoculars to help me identify all the towns, buildings and hills I
could see. Out to the West were the mountains of Snowdonia, whilst
over to the East most of Merseyside was clearly visible.

I wanted to be back home by 4:00pm and I wasn't sure how long it would
take me to get back to the car, so I didn't stop until I got to the
Jubilee Tower on Moel Famau. Apparently, this was built to celebrate
the 50th year of George III's reign, but it was never completed. I sat
under the North side of the tower, which was sheltered from the breeze
and ate my lunch.

From the tower I walked short distance to the North East. Once away
from the shelter of the tower I was exposed to the very cold North
Easterly breeze. I joined the descent path, which dropped down steeply
North Eastwards along the left hand side of a wood and once I reached
the wood I was sheltered from the cold wind. I reached a small finger
post where my path crossed a track. I carried straight on down hill
making for the left hand side of the reservoir below. Following the
path beside the reservoir, I reached a gate at the end of the lane.
Walking along the lane brought me out next to the car. It was 2:30pm,
so I just had time to make another cup of hot chocolate before I set
off for home.
