#+BEGIN_COMMENT
.. title: Traverse Of The Glyders From Capel Curig To Nant Peris
.. slug: 2010-06-02-traverse-of-the-glyders-from-capel-curig-to-nant-peris
.. date: 2010-06-02 17:47:41 UTC
.. tags: mountaineering
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
#+END_COMMENT
* A Traverse of the Glyders from Capel Curig to Nant Peris.
I have traversed the Glyders a few times starting at Ogwen
and descending to into Capel Curig. Back in 1980 I started in Nant
Peris and did the traverse to Capel Curig. However, this year we were
staying at the Bryn Tyrch in Capel Curig and I decided to do the walk
the opposite way round, from Capel Curig to Nant Peris.

#+BEGIN_HTML
<div class="photofloatr">
  <p><a class="fancybox-thumb" rel="fancybox-thumb" href="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2134.JPG"  title="Summit of Glyder Fach from Castle of the Winds."> <img src="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2134.JPG" width="200"
     alt="Summit of Glyder Fach from Castle of the Winds."></a></p>
  <p>Summit of Glyder Fach from Castle of the Winds.</p>

</div>
#+END_HTML

Note to see more photographs from the walk click [[file:./glyders_photos.html][here]] .

It was going to be hot and sunny, so I stopped at the shop in Capel to
buy some flavoured water and a couple of slabs of flapjack. Walking
from West to East (Nant Peris to Capel), finding the route from the
end of the Glyders down over Y Foel Goch into Capel Curig is
straightforward, as you can see exactly where you are going. However,
the route finding when starting from Capel was a bit more of a
challenge. I walked up the track behind Joe Brown's shop and after a
few hundred yards passed a farm on my left. I walked along the track
for another few hundred yards and then struck up the hill to the left
of the track. There are several indistinct tracks around here, but if
you walk roughly parallel to the summit ridge of Moel Siabod, while
trending up hill, you should arrive at a ladder style where various
tracks converge.

Once over the style the track is much more distinct and crosses a
broad grassy plateau towards the summit of Gallt yr Ogof. It is
possible to contour below the summit by following the path to the
left, but I scrambled up via various subsidiary tops to the summit
cairn. The views from here are spectacular. You are more or less right
in the middle of the Snowdonia range, with views towards the
Carneddeau, Snowdon plus views of the mountains to the south and
west. Almost all of the significant Snowdonia peaks are visible from
here.

#+BEGIN_HTML
<div class="photofloatl">
  <p><a class="fancybox-thumb" rel="fancybox-thumb" href="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2132.JPG"  title="Snowdon and the Castle of the Winds."> <img src="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2132.JPG" width="200"
     alt="Snowdon and the Castle of the Winds."></a></p>
  <p>Snowdon and the Castle of the Winds.</p>

</div>
#+END_HTML


From Gallt yr Ogof there is a slight descent to a damp col, which
contains a lovely small llyn, then a short climb to the flat summit of
Y Foel Goch. In my old (1979) version of Pouchers "The Welsh Peaks" Y
Foel Goch is described as the "Nameless Peak" and it was only very
recently I discovered its name. Although it was a half term weekend, I
hadn't seen another person on this part of the walk all morning.

From the summit of Y Foel Goch the track drops down towards the shores
of Llyn Caseg Ffraith. The ground round here can be very boggy in all
but the driest of conditions. Many years ago when the ground was
covered in snow I remember wandering about up here wondering where the
lake was, when I suddenly broke through the ice and went in up to my knees.

There were great views of the East Face of Tryfan and Bristly Ridge as
I climbed up the scree slope towards Glyder Fach. Many years ago I
remember descending this slope in a white out after climbing one of
the gullies on Glyder Fach. It was so windy that we had to lean a long
way forwards as we forced our way down the slope. Today I was sweating
buckets as  climbed up towards the point where Bristly Ridge emerges
onto the summit plateau. I continued up the Cantilever, where I took
the obligatory photos of someone standing on it. Continuing over the
large pile of blocks that form the summit of Glyder Fach, I made my way
towards the Castle of the Winds. I scrambled up to the top and ate my
lunch. Although there were now plenty of other people around, I was
the only one who scrambled up to the top of the Castle. Maybe it was
the large cloud of midges up there that had discouraged others from
climbing up.

After eating my flapjack and having a short rest I scrambled down to
the path and on to the col between Glyder Fawr and Glyder Fach. From
here you can clearly see where the Gribin Ridge emerges onto the
summit plateau and a little further on there are good views of the
cliffs at the back of Cwm Cneifon (Nameless Cwm). It's difficult to
say exactly which pile of stones atop Glyder Fawr is the summit, but
soon the path begins its descent to Llyn y Cwn. This is a really
unpleasant slither down loose scree, which in many places has been
completely eroded into a muddy path. The only good thing that can be
said about it, is that it better descending than ascending it. A
couple of years ago in February I started up this slope, having
completely a couple of winter climbs on the Devil's Kitchen. I fancied
carrying on up to the summit of Glyder Fawr, but after wading about
half way up in bottomless powder snow I gave up and turned back.

Today I was glad of a rest when I reached Llyn y Cwn. I was starting
to get dehydrated. I had only bought about 500ml of water and really I
needed far more. I didn't fancy drinking the water directly from the
lake and there were no sources of running water close by.

#+BEGIN_HTML
<div class="photofloatr">
  <p><a class="fancybox-thumb" rel="fancybox-thumb" href="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2120.JPG"  title="Glyder fach from Y Foel Goch."> <img src="/images/2010-06-glyders/DSCF2120.JPG" width="200"
     alt="Glyder fach from Y Foel Goch."></a></p>
  <p>Glyder fach from Y Foel Goch.</p>

</div>
#+END_HTML


Time was pressing, as I had arranged to meet the family outside the
Vaynol Arms at 3:15pm.  Also given the lack of water, I decided not to
climb Y Garn, but to descend to the Llanberis Pass via the path that
follows the Afon Las into Cwm Padrig. The path descends easily at
first and then steeply, with a couple of scrambly sections. Just above
the road there is a metal bridge (not shown on my map) over the
stream.

Once down in Gwastadant I followed the new wooden footpath, which runs
along the far side of the stone wall to Nant Peris. I don't know who
was responsible for installing the path, but it certainly makes
walking along this section of road much easier and safer. I arrived
back at the car about 3:45pm, half an hour later than anticipated. By
this time I was really dehydrated with a headache and feeling
dizzy. However, a quick trip to Pete's Eats and a pint of tea made me
feel much better.
